In China, there is an old saying, “Měi míng shèng guò měi mào,” which roughly translates to “a beautiful name outshines a beautiful visage.” It says that a name is something of value. It has an intrinsic beauty that you cannot find in anything else. And just like a face, a name has detail. It has emotion. It conveys meaning. And most importantly, a name has a history. A journey of kings and queens, of prisoners and slaves, of joys and riches, of pain and heartbreak.

My father always told me to take pride in our name. Every year, on the first day of school, he would always say to me in the car, “You are a Xu, you have my DNA. Rèn zhēn yì diǎn. Focus. You can do great things.” But walking into the classroom to meet my new teachers, I never felt great. There was always the same ritual of the teacher smoothly recanting the names on their roster. And after a long period of anticipation, they would reach the bottom, struggling with a simple two letter last name. Mine.

This year was no different. “Jerry… Shoe? Or is it Zoo? Kazoo?” the teacher asked, looking puzzled. She read the list again, unsure of whether or not there was a typo on the page, before scanning the room for the last face she hadn’t yet met, and landing her questioning gaze on me.

And once again I was the laughing stock. The comically oversized red shoes of a circus clown. The monkey at the zoo being ridiculed by the onlookers. The nasally sound of a dollar store musical instrument. And contrary to my father’s pride, I was ashamed. Ashamed of my heritage. Ashamed of being named Xu. Ashamed of being mocked on the playground in elementary school. Ashamed of always needing to spell out my measly two letters to the front desk at the doctor’s office.

I carefully nodded and stammered, “Yeah, ‘shoe’ is fine. That works.” She processed my response for a second. And then unexpectedly, she inquired, “No, how do you really pronounce it?”

My mind raced. I considered the different possibilities of her intent behind the question. Was she just generally curious? Or was this going to be an experience of the thinly veiled anti-Asian sentiment that has become so prevalent? No, it couldn’t be. Why would her intent be malicious? I gave it another moment of questioning, and figured I would just say my name and get it over with. So I cautiously replied with the pronunciation, afraid of the foreign sound, an elegant blend of a mother’s shushing and the whistling of her child.

“It’s pronounced xǔ.”

As I stated my name, I realized that it had been years since I’d last truly pronounced it out loud. I didn’t know if it was the tranquil silence, or the spontaneous authenticity behind the question, or something else, but the shame I had felt just seconds ago retreated into the depths of the jungle of my mind like a tiger forfeiting its prey. I felt empowered. Strong. Recognizing the millennia of history behind my name was exhilarating. My name was not strange as I had once thought, but it was special. Unique.

To my surprise, the teacher repeated my pronunciation perfectly. “Xu,” she declared, and then looked into the air as if the succinctness of the two letters had piqued her interest and she was trying to visualize the treasures behind a plain facade. Then she glanced at me with a sparkle in her bespectacled eye.

“That’s a beautiful name.”
